.\" header = mushead
.AM
.nr PS 13
.nr VS 16
.pl 11.7i
.LP
\&
.sp 1.8c
.ce 1
\f3\s+5Flute Sonata BWV 1032\s0\fP
.sp 1.6c
.LP
Johann Sebastian Bach has left us
three flute sonatas with obligato keyboard parts.
There are also two or three flute sonatas with continuo accompaniments;
the authenticity of one of these is contested.

.LP
.nh
The manuscript of the Sonata in A
is titled \f2Sonata a 1 Traversa è Cembalo obligato di J. S. Bach\fP
in Bach's handwriting.
It was discovered by von Winterfeld in an antique shop in Breslau
and presented to the \f2Preuß. Staatsbibliotek\fP in Berlin;
during the second world war it was moved
to the monastery of Grüssau in central Silesia.
At the end of the war, it was removed by the Polish government
to the Jagiellon University in Cracow,
and in 1977 was presented to the \f2Deutsche Staatsbibliotek\fP in Berlin.
The manuscript is written on nineteen staves, and apart from
this sonata it also contains a concerto for two keyboards and string orchestra.
The concerto occupies the top sixteen staves on each page,
and, with typical economy, the Sonata fills up the lowest three staves.
Eight of the manuscript pages are intact,
but unfortunately, on six of the pages the lowest part has been cut away,
so that we lack some forty-five bars at the end of the first movement.

.LP
.nh
Completions of the first movement have been published by
Gustav Schreck (Peters),
Georges Barrère (Boston),
Alfred Dürr (Bärenreiter),
William Bennett (Chester),
and Bart Kuijken (Breitkopf u. Härtel).
The copyright status of these completions being unclear,
this edition provides a new completion, bars 63 to 87, by Peter Billam.
Also, since the manuscript leaves the right hand of the keyboard part blank
in bars 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 25, 26, 27, and in the last beat of bar 37,
these bars have also been completed by Peter Billam.

.LP
.nh
Www.pjb.com.au also offers versions of this sonata
transposed into C major for Alto recorder,
and into G major for Descant recorder.

.LP
.ce 1
\f2Peter J Billam\fP
.LP
.ce 1
\f2www.pjb.com.au/mus\fP
