.\" header = mushead
.nr PS 12
.nr VS 15
.pl 11.7i
.LP
\&
.sp 1.3c
.ce 2
\f3\s+9The Musical Offering\s-9\fP
.sp 0.9c
.LP
.nh
In May of 1747,
after finishing the B minor Mass
and the second book of the Well-Tempered Clavier,
Johann Sebastian Bach travelled to Potsdam,
accompanied by his son Wilhelm Friedeman,
to visit his successful son Carl Philipp Emmanuel,
who was personal harpsichordist to Frederick the Great of Prussia.
Johann Sebastian was still a humble schoolteacher;
he taught Latin and Music at St Thomas School in Leipzig.

.LP
.nh
Potsdam was a very musical court.
Personal flute teacher to Frederick the Great was Johann Joachim Quantz,
the finest flute player in the country,
the author of the book "On Playing the Flute",
and the only person allowed to find fault with the king's flute playing.
Carl Philipp Emmanuel would have spent much time playing music with Quantz,
and they must have sounded wonderful.
Frederick himself was a fine flute player,
and a composer whose works are still played by flute players today.

.LP
.nh
When Johann Sebastian arrived,
the King immediately cancelled the evening's planned concert.
He had an extensive collection of harpsichords, and Johann Sebastian,
without being given time to change out of his travelling clothes,
was ushered from room to room and asked to improvise on each one.

.LP
.nh
The King also had fifteen of the new fortepianos,
which he correctly foresaw as the great new wave in music.
They were loud modern inventions, where the strings were so thick
that they could not even be plucked, but had to be hit with hammers.
Silbermann, of Freyburg, had devised an elaborate mechanism
to allow the hammer to rebound even as the key remained pressed.
The fortepiano had some of the touch sensitivity of the clavichord,
but was loud enough to be played in concert, even in public;
however, it could not play vibrato, as the clavichord could.
This was the only time that Johann Sebastian played on the new fortepiano,
and every piano player since would love to know
what he thought of the instrument, and how he played it.
Certainly Silbermann was the organ-maker that Johann Sebastian most admired,
so the new creation would have been accorded respect.

.LP
.nh
As is usual with visiting organists,
Johann Sebastian was asked to improvise on a given theme.
The King sat at the keyboard and played a fine Bach-like theme,
rich and dramatic, and asked his guest to improvise a fugue upon it.
The King admired the learned treatment of his subject,
and asked Johann Sebastian to play it
in four, then five, and finally six voices.
Nobody knows what Johann Sebastian played in response,
and I am sure that it sounded superb,
but he probably failed to sustain a six-voice texture,
and presumably the King pointed this out.

