.\" header = mushead
.nr PS 12
.nr VS 15
.pl 11.7i
.LP
\&
.sp 1.6c
.LP
.nh
A six-voice fugue is an almost unheard-of technical challenge
\- there is none in the Well-Tempered Clavier, for example \-
and the King's theme, which does not fit in stretto with itself,
is particularly unfavourable to treatment in many voices.
On the other hand, because of its great eloquence,
it is a wonderful subject for a three-voice fugue,
and presumably Johann Sebastian pointed this out.

.LP
.nh
Arnold Schoenberg even suggested that the royal theme had been devised
by Carl Philipp Emmanuel as a practical joke,
because he knew a six-voice treatment would be impossible.
I do think it was written by Carl Philipp Emmanuel,
because it shows a superb understanding of Johann Sebastian's style,
and is simply too good for the King to have invented.
However, I do not think Carl Philipp Emmanuel,
at the peak of a brilliant career,
and well aware of his father's extraordinary powers,
would have felt any need to ridicule him.

.LP
.nh
The King also desired to hear Johann Sebastian perform on the organ,
so the next day he was taken round all the organs in Potsdam.
The following day he returned to Leipzig.

.LP
.nh
The voyage to Potsdam is a defining event in the western musical tradition,
because it is the only time Johann Sebastian was accorded public honour,
the only time he played the fortepiano,
and because it brings him, and all his contrapuntal powers,
into contact with the best of the next generation,
who were to develop the style which became that of Haydn and Mozart.

.LP
.nh
Six months later, Johann Sebastian sent to Potsdam a
\f2Musical Offering\fP which he had had engraved at his own expense.
The opening piece is a three voice fugue (\f2Ricercare a 3\fP)
on the King's theme;
this I see as Johann saying to Frederick
"When I mentioned that the best setting for this theme was in three voices,
this is what I had in mind ..." .
The centrepiece is a six voice fugue (\f2Ricercare a 6\fP)
on the King's theme; this I see as Johann saying to Carl Philipp
"You see ? My art is adequate to your test ..." .
The finale is a trio sonata, for flute, violin and continuo,
largely based on the King's theme, a delight to play,
perhaps the greatest and certainly the grandest trio sonata ever written.
Between these three pieces are eight smaller ones, all on the King's theme.
They include a number of puzzle canons,
and the \f2Fuga Canonica in Epidiapente\fP for flute and keyboard.

.LP
Then Johann Sebastian Bach turned his attention to the \f2Art of Fugue\fP.
.LP
.sp 0.8c
.ce 2
Peter Billam
.sp 0.4c
\s+1\f2www.pjb.com.au\fP\s0
