.\" header = mushead
.nr PS 12
.nr VS 15
.pl 11.7i
.de Lp
.LP
.nh
..
.LP
\&
.sp 1.4c

.Lp
The Passacaglia and Fugue is a summit of the organ repertoire;
but there is also an important tradition of playing it on
stringed keyboard instruments.
The manuscript,
which according to Albert Schweizer vanished in the mid-1800's, 
was apparently headed \f2Cembalo e pedale\fP,
and Schweizer opined that it was
\f2in erster Linie für das Cembalo mit Pedal
und erst in zweiter für die Orgel geschrieben\fP
(in Ernest Newman's translation,
"was written in the first place for the cembalo with pedal,
and later arranged for the organ").
Such instruments are rare these days, but
Jakob Adlung, in \f2Musica Mechanica Organoedi\fP (1768), describes
clavichords and harpsichords with pedals like an organ pedal-board.
They would have been used mainly for practising organ pieces.
Bach did possess three of these, and according to Forkel,
Bach "like to improvise on a two-manual clavier with pedal".

.Lp
Marcel Dupré suggests 60 crochets per minute for both the Passacaglia
and the Fugue.
The american organist E. Power Biggs has recorded the Passacaglia on a
harpsichord with pedals (made by John Challis);
he suggests "The music seems equally at home in the sonority of strings
or pipes, and it assumes a different individuality in each.
The harpsichord, perhaps, allows greater rhythmic suppleness
and more tempo contrasts between variations".
He takes the Fugue at about 76 crochets per minute,
and most of the Passacaglia around 66;
the variations at bars 40, 72, 96, 112 and 120 he takes around 52,
that at bar 144 slower still at around 44,
and the running variations at 80 and 88 much faster
at around 100 crochets per minute.
He uses \f2inégale\fP quavers from bar 24
and semiquavers from bars 40 and 112.
In addition, each variation is shaped with its own arc,
moving fastest around its fifth or sixth bar.

.Lp
The last quaver in bar 164 is usually granted a fermata and
followed by a dramatic pause.
Bach writes the upbeat to the Fugue, the middle C in bar 168,
into the final chord of the Passacaglia;
this note is often re-taken, in the tempo of the Fugue,
after the end of the chord.

.Lp
The aim of this arrangement for piano four hands
is to make this music available to piano players,
and to make it as practical to sight-read as possible,
to minimise the time spent in working out details.
The typical four-part texture is shared with two parts to each player;
this divides the organ manual parts between the two players.
Sometimes this makes the voice-leading less clear,
but the original for organ can always be consulted.
Some thought has been given to feasible page turns.
Some registration decisions, such as adding octaves, have been made,
and conflicts between parts have been resolved.

.Lp
.ce 1
Peter J Billam,\ \ \ \ \f2www.pjb.com.au\fP
