.\" header = mushead
.AM
.nr PS 13
.nr VS 15
.pl 11.7i
.de Lp
.LP
.nh
..

.LP
\&
.sp 1.4c
.ce 1
\f3\s+5Fuga super: Jesus Christus unser Heiland\s0\fP
.sp 1.2c
.Lp
The 3rd book of J. S. Bach's Clavierübungen was published in 1739.
Just after the Chorale Preludes (for organ) and before the 4 Duets
(presumably for harpsichord), there is a Fugue, on the same hymn-tune
subject as the previous chorale prelude,
marked \f2Fuga super: Jesus Christus unser Heiland. a 4. Manualiter\fP,
BWV 689, in 4 voices, written on two staves (no pedals) in f minor.
(See e.g. Dover, JSB Organ Music, p.147)

.Lp
It's quite unusual to base a fugue on a hymn-tune subject, mostly the
subject has to be purpose-designed, but this one works beautifully,
with close stretti and a grand augmented entry near the end.
It's a lovely fugue, flowing and sonorous, full of gravitas.

.Lp
It was originally published here in the original key f minor;
some passages particularly in the tenor line lay in the weak
low register and used the low Eb a great deal.
Therefore it is now published two semitones higher in the far more practical
key of g minor. This demands a high C# of the soprano in bar 38,
but it is at least comfortably placed between two high D's.

.Lp
Few changes are necessary:
In bar 15, Bass, bottom D quaver omitted
In bar 19, Bass, bottom D up an octave.
In bars 30 first three notes, Tenor up an octave.
In bar 47, Bass, the first quaver has now been re-included.

.Lp
Certain optional divisi have been written out to assist balance.
The Bass divisi in bars 17\-19 and 43\-46
may be needed to support the tenors in their low register.
If multiple Soprani are playing, the high passage from 37\-41
should be played by just one of them.
If just one Soprano is playing, the Altos should divide
in the last three beats of bars 66, and in bar 67.
The proportions of all these divisi should be adjusted
so as to balance the fugal voices.

.Lp
Also included is Bach's Chorale setting of the same tune, BWV 363.
This has been transposed up three semitones from e minor into g minor
in order to fit on SATB recorders.

.Lp
.ce 2
Peter J Billam
.br
\f2www.pjb.com.au\fP
