.\" header = mushead
.AM
.nr PS 12
.nr VS 14
.pl 11.7i
.LP
\&
.sp 2.3c
.LP
.ce 1
\f3\s+8Twelve Fantasias for Flute, arranged for Recorder\s0\fP
.sp 2.0c
.LP
.nh
Georg Philipp Telemann, the most prolific composer of his time,
and widely regarded as Germany's leading composer
during the first half of the 18th century, was born in Magdeburg in 1681.

.LP
.nh
In 1725, he embarked on an ambitious programme of publishing his own music,
even engraving his own plates,
which he could do at a rate of up to nine or ten per day.
By 1728 he had established agents in Berlin, Leipzig, Jena, Nuremberg,
Frankfurt, Amsterdam and London,
and in the following years he continued to expand his distribution
network through booksellers and friends.

.LP
.nh
Telemann wrote three autobiographies.
In the 1729 autobiography he succinctly described his artistic development:
"What I have accomplished with respect to musical style is well known.
First came the Polish style, followed by the French, church, chamber and
operatic styles, and finally the Italian style,
which currently occupies me more than the others do."

.LP
.nh
Telemann wrote his \f2Twelve Fantasias for Flute\fP (TWV 40:2-13)
in Hamburg during 1732 or 1733.
There are also sets of twelve Fantasias
for the Viola de Gamba, written in 1728,
and for the Violin, written in 1735.
It is easy to underestimate his achievement in the light of J. S. Bach,
but if Bach had not written his Flute partita,
Cello suites and Violin sonatas and partitas,
the Telemann Fantasias would be the summit of the repertoire for the solo line.

.LP
.nh
The scores are available in Volume Six of
\f2Georg Philipp Telemann : Musikalische Werke\fP,
published by the Gesellschaft für Musikforschung,
M. Ruhne, W. Hobohm and the
Zentrum für Telemann-Pflege und -Forschung, Magdeburg
(Kassel und Basel, 1950).

.LP
.nh
Telemann died of a chest ailment in 1767 in Hamburg.
His grandson Georg Michael inherited a large number of
autographs and manuscript copies of his vocal works.
The rest of his musical estate was sold at auction in Hamburg on the 6th
of September 1769, and most of this material has disappeared.

