.\" header = mushead
.AM
.nr PS 11
.nr VS 13
.pl 29.7c
.LP
\&
.sp 1.2c
.ce 1
\f3\s+4Cello Suite III in C major, \s-2BWV\s+2 1009\s-5\fP
.sp 1.0c
.LP
.nh
The Cello Suites, written in Cöthen around 1720,
have been called "the apotheosis of the Dance",
a title they share with Beethoven's Seventh Symphony.
No-one but Bach has written such rich music for the solo line.
Everywhere there are several voices implied.
allowing Bach to write not just melody, but also counterpoint and harmony.
The flow of new motifs serves the needs of the implied counterpoint,
but the motifs also have their own motivic logic,
balancing identity for each movement with variety within it.
Casals points out the implication for the performer:
"It is fantastic to think that with one note after the other there can
be melody, the central voices and the bass all together.  A wonderful
polyphony .\ .\ .\  We have to give the proper expression to each voice."

.LP
.nh
The six suites have different characters.
Casals spoke of the "fundamental mood of optimism" of the G-major suite,
contrasting with the "tragic feeling" of the suite in d-minor,
or the "heroic" suite in C-major.
Rostropovic spoke of the "Lightness" of the first suite,
the "Sorrow and intensity" of the second,
the "Brilliance" of the third.

.LP
.nh
Many wonderful recordings are available;
for example by Pierre Fournier, Pablo Casals, Pieter Wispelwey,
or Jaap ter Linden,
or on the viola de gamba by Paulo Pandolfo,
on the flute by Wilbert Hazelzet,
or on the recorder by Marion Verbruggen.

.LP
.nh
Within each suite, the character of each movement should be differentiated,
and there should always be variety from one dance tempo to the next.
Of this third suite,
Casals observed "The first thing we must understand when playing the cello
suites is that, as with the partitas for violin and for keyboard,
the Prelude gives the character to the whole work",
and he considered this Prelude to have a "heroic" caharacter.
Of the Sarabande he said "A Sarabande is not a romance, or an adagio;
it is a Spanish dance, which used to be performed in the churches,
and is still danced in Sevilla.
We must not be lost between one beat and another".
In the bars in the Courante with descending arpeggios,
he taught that the melody lies in the first quaver,
so that the remaining five should be lighter.
Likewise, in the first Bourrée bars 1 and 3,
he taught that the the melody lies
in the 1st and 4th beats, and the 2nd and 3rd should not be given equal
importance lest they become "a repetition which harms the melody".
The second Bourrée has a contrasted character.
When teaching the Gigue he observed
"This must give joy to everyone who hears it.
No formality. \f2Rustic\fP - there is no place for niceness."

.LP
.nh
The first three of the six suites can be played on the recorder.
Of course the chords have to be played as arpeggios,
and some low notes have to be rewritten;
these are given here in chords, with the lower note for flute players,
and the upper for recorders.
Several of the notes are contested; for example, the
third-last note in bar 7 of the Sarabande is C in the
Bachgesellschaft edition, but B-flat in Anna Magdalena's manuscript.
On a recorder, bar 7 of the Allemande is difficult,
and players should feel free to omit a note or two.
All slurs in this edition are editorial suggestions only,
and can be disregarded with a clear conscience.

.LP
.ce 1
\f2Peter J Billam\fP
.LP
.ce 1
\f2www.pjb.com.au\fP
